Learn HTML (modules 12-20) (#9576)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/learn/html/forms/index.md

In [designing forms](/learn/forms/internationalization/), it is important to consider that not everyone is like you. Someone
may have a single letter as a last name (or no last name at all), may not have a zip code, might have a three-line street address,
may not have a street address. They may be viewing a translated version of your form.

Form controls, their labels, and the error messages should be visible on the screen, accurate and meaningful, programmatically
determinable, and programmatically associated with the appropriate form element or group. The [`autocomplete`](/learn/forms/autofill/#how-does-autofill-work)
attribute can and should be used to enable faster form completion and improve accessibility.

HTML provides all the tools for making basic form controls accessible. The more interactive a form element or process is,
the more attention needs to be given to accessibility with respect to focus management, setting and updating ARIA names, roles,
and values, where necessary, and ARIA live announcements as required. But, as we've learned here, with HTML alone, you can get a
long way to your goal of accessibility and validity without resorting to ARIA or JavaScript.

> 
> ## Check your understanding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

authors:
  - estelleweyl
description: An overview of forms in HTML.
date: 2023-14-02
tags:
  - html
---

> Most sites and applications include a web form. Joke sites, like [DoWebsitesNeedToLookExactlyTheSameInEveryBrowser.com](http://dowebsitesneedtolookexactlythesameineverybrowser.com/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most sites and applications include a web form. Joke sites, like [DoWebsites<wbr>Need<wbr>To<wbr>Look<wbr>Exactly<wbr>The<wbr>Same<wbr>In<wbr>Every<wbr>Browser.com](http://dowebsitesneedtolookexactlythesameineverybrowser.com/),
```

Reviewer: allow the link to break anywhere no matter the viewport width

> may not have a form, but even [MachineLearningWorkshop.com](https://machinelearningworkshop.com/) (MLW), which originated as an April Fool's day joke, has a form,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may not have a form, but even [Machine<wbr>Learning<wbr>Workshop.com](https://machinelearningworkshop.com/) (MLW), which originated as an April Fool's day joke, has a form,
```

albeit a fake one. MLW's main "call to action" is a registration form for machines to sign up for a workshop. This form
is contained in a `<form>` element.

The [HTML `<form>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form) identifies a document [landmark](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles#3._landmark_roles) containing
interactive controls for submitting information. Nested in a `<form>` you'll find all the interactive (and non-interactive)
form controls that make up that form.

> HTML is powerful. This section focuses on the power of HTML, covering what HTML can do without adding JavaScript.
> Using form data client-side to update the UI in some way generally involves JavaScript ([or CSS](https://codepen.io/jcoulterdesign/pen/NOMeEb)), which is not discussed here.
> There is an entire [Learn Forms](/learn/forms/) course. We won't duplicate all the information from that section here, but we will introduce
> several form controls and the HTML attributes that empower them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTML is powerful. This section focuses on the power of HTML, covering what HTML can do without adding JavaScript.
Using form data client-side to update the UI in some way generally involves [CSS](https://codepen.io/jcoulterdesign/pen/NOMeEb) or JavaScript, which is not discussed here.
There is an entire [Learn Forms](/learn/forms/) course. We won't duplicate that section here, but we will introduce
several form controls and the HTML attributes that empower them.
```
was too wordy

With forms, you can enable users to interact with your website or application, validate the information entered, and submit
the data to a server. HTML attributes can enable requiring the user to select form controls or enter a value. HTML
attributes can define specific criteria that the value must match to be valid. When the user tries to submit the form,

> all the form control values go through [client-side constraint validation](#), without JavaScript, and can prevent submission
> until the data matches the required criteria. You can also turn this feature off: setting the [`novalidate`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form#attr-novalidate)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all the form control values go through [client-side constraint validation](#) and can prevent submission
until the data matches the required criteria; all without JavaScript. You can also turn this feature off: setting the [`novalidate`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form#attr-novalidate)
```

attribute on the `<form>` or, more often, `formnovalidate` on a button, saving the form data for later completion,
prevents validation.

## Submitting forms

Forms are submitted when the user activates a submit button nested within the form. When using `<input>` for buttons, the
'value' is the button's label, and is displayed in the button. When using `<button>`, the label is the text between the opening
and closing `<button>` tags. A submit button can be written either of two ways:

```html
<input type="submit" value="Submit Form">

>  <button type="submit">Submit Form</button>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<button type="submit">Submit Form</button>
```

The attributes of the `<form>` element set the [HTTP method](/learn/forms/form-element/#how-is-the-data-transferred) by
which the form is submitted and the URL that processes the form submission. Yes, forms can be submitted, processed, and
a new page can be loaded without any JavaScript. The [`<form>` element](/learn/forms/form/) is that powerful.

The `<form>` element's [`action`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form#attr-action) and [`method`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form#attr-method)
attribute values define the URL that processes the form data and the HTTP method used to submit the data, respectively.
By default, the form data gets sent to the current page. Otherwise, set the `action` attribute to the URL of where the data should be sent.

The data sent is made up of name/value pairs of the form's various form controls. By default, this includes all the form
controls nested within the form that have a `name`. However, with the `form` attribute, it is possible to include form controls
outside the `<form>` and to omit form controls nested within the `<form>`. Supported on form controls and `<fieldset>`,

> the `form` attribute takes as its value the `id` of the form the control is associated with, not necessarily the form it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `form` attribute takes as its value the `id` of the form the control it is associated with, not necessarily the form it
```

is nested in. This means form controls don't need to be physically nested in a `<form>`.

{% Aside 'warning' %}
Be careful though: using the `form` attribute makes it possible to disassociate a form control from its form by including
it with an empty or erroneous value.
{% endAside %}

The `method` attribute defines the HTTP protocol of the request: generally `GET` or `POST`. With `GET`, the form data is sent as a
parameter string of `name=value` pairs, appended to the `action`'s URL.

With `POST`, the data is appended to the body of the HTTP request. When sending secure data, such as passwords and credit card

> information, always use POST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information, always use `POST`.
```

> There is also a DIALOG method. If a `<form method="dialog">` is within a `<dialog>`, submitting the form will close the dialog;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also a `DIALOG` method. If a `<form method="dialog">` is within a `<dialog>`, submitting the form will close the dialog;
```

there is a submit event though the data is neither cleared nor submitted. Again, without JavaScript. This is discussed in
[the dialog section](/learn/html/dialog/). Just note, because this doesn't submit the form, you probably want to
include both `formmethod="dialog"`and `formnovalidate` on the submit button.

Form buttons can have more than the attributes described at the start of this section. If the button includes a `formaction`,
`formenctype`, `formmethod`, `formnovalidate`, or `formtarget` attribute, the values set on the button activating the form
submission take precedence over the `action`, [`enctype`](/learn/forms/form/#enable-users-to-submit-files), `method`, and [`target`](/learn/html/attributes/)
set on the `<form>`. Constraint validation occurs prior to form submission, but only if there is neither a
`formnovalidate` on the activated submit button nor a `novalidate` on the `<form>`.

> For the example buttons, no name or value for the button gets sent with the form as neither example has a name. If a form
> control doesn't have a name, it will not be sent with the form. To capture which button was used to submit a form, give
> the button a `name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To capture which button was used to submit a form, give
the button a `name`.  Buttons with no name or value don't get sent with the form data on form submission.
```

Reviewer: the example was too far away from this paragraph, so just made it wordy.

## After submitting the form

When the user submits a completed online form, the names and values of the relevant form controls get submitted. The name is the value of the `name` attribute. The values come from the contents of the `value` attribute or the value entered or picked by the user. The value of a `<textarea>` is its inner text.
The value of a `<select>` is the selected `<option>`'s `value` or, if the `<option>` doesn't include a `value` attribute, the value is the selected option's inner text.

```html
<form method="GET">
<label for="student">Pick a student:</label>
<select name="student" id="student">

>    <option>Blendan Smooth</option>
>    <option value="hoover">Hoover Sukhdeep</option>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   <option value="hoover">Hoover Sukhdeep</option>
   <option>Blendan Smooth</option>
```

<label for="machine">Pick a student:</label>
<select name="machine" id="machine">
   <option value="hoover">Hoover Sukhdeep</option>
   <option>Blendan Smooth</option>
   <option value="toasty">Toasty McToastface</option>
</select>
<input type="submit" value="Submit Form">
</form>

Selecting "Hoover Sukhdeep" (or doing nothing, as the browser displays and therefore selects the first option value by default)
and then clicking the submit button will reload this page, setting the URL to:

```html
https://web.dev/learn/html/forms?student=hoover
```

Because the second option doesn't have a `value` attribute, the inner text is submitted as the value. Selecting "Blendan Smooth"
and clicking the submit button will reload this page, setting the URL to:

```html
https://web.dev/learn/html/forms?student=Blendan+Smooth
```

When a form is submitted, the information sent includes the names and values of all named form controls that have a `name`
except non-selected checkboxes, non-selected radio buttons, and the names and values of any buttons other than the one that
submitted the form. For all other form controls, if the form control has a name, but no value was entered or defaulted, the

> form control's `name` gets submitted with an empty string as the `value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
form control's `name` gets submitted with an empty value.
```
the original was not fully accurate.

on the `:required` and `:valid`/`:invalid` pseudoclasses, the browser supplied error messages stemming from errors based on
the `required`, `pattern`, `min`, `max`, and even `type` attributes, come at form submission.

{% Img src="image/cGQxYFGJrUUaUZyWhyt9yo5gHhs1/C3UYbvnyGYyLhCqReM8M.png", alt="An error message indicating that a multi-choice field is required.", width="738", height="354" %}

When we attempt to submit the form without picking the required favorite student, constraint validation prevents form submission
because of a `validityState.valueMissing` error.

If any of the `validityState` properties return `true`, submission is blocked, and the browser displays an error message
in the first incorrect form control, giving it focus. When the user activates a form submission and there are invalid values,
the first invalid form control will show an error message and receive focus. If a required control has no value set, if a
numeric value is out of range, or if a value is not of the type required by the `type` attribute, the form will not validate,
will not submit, and an error message will appear.

> If a `number`, date, or time value is below the minimum `min` set, above the maximum `max` set, or out of step with the
> `step` value, whether explicitly set or defaulting to `1`, the control will be [`:out-of-range`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/:out-of-range) (and `:invalid`), and
> the user will be informed of the [`valididityState.rangeUnderflow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/rangeUnderflow),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `number`, date, or time value is below the minimum `min` se or above the maximum `max` set the control will be (https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/:out-of-range) (and `:invalid`), and
the user will be informed of the [`valididityState.rangeUnderflow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/rangeUnderflow),
```

> [`validityState.rangeOverflow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/rangeUnderflow) or
> [`validityState.stepMismatch`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/stepMismatch) error when they
> try to submit the form. The error appears as a bubble and by default provides helpful information on how to rectify the mistake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`validityState.rangeOverflow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/rangeUnderflow)  error when they
try to submit the form. If the value is out of step with the
`step` value, whether explicitly set or defaulting to `1`, the control will be [`:out-of-range`] (and `:invalid`) and there will be a
[`validityState.stepMismatch`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/stepMismatch) error. The error appears as a bubble and by default provides helpful information on how to rectify the mistake.
```
